Reading: Assignment Overview: Build a Chatbot Interface for the Recommendation System
Estimated time: 5 minutes

Introduction
You designed specialized agents and integrated them into a coordinated multi-agent workflow. The system works effectively, but it requires technical knowledge to use. Users must write code to invoke the workflow and parse JSON outputs.

In this lab, you will build a user-friendly chatbot interface with Gradio to make your recommendation system accessible to non-technical users. The chatbot will allow users to describe their food preferences in natural language and receive personalized restaurant and recipe recommendations through an interactive conversation.

Screenshot requirement for the Final Project
During the course of the lab, you will be instructed to take a screenshot of the final code cell and its output. Name the file M3L3_preference_extraction_test.jpg.

This screenshot will later serve as a component for the Final Project.

Why build a chatbot interface?
A powerful AI system is only valuable if people can use it. A chatbot interface provides:

1. Accessibility
Non-technical users can interact with the system through natural conversation instead of code.

2. User experience
A visual interface with chat history, formatted outputs, and interactive elements creates a better experience than command-line tools.

3. Real-world deployment
Production AI systems need user interfaces. Building this interface prepares you for real-world deployment scenarios.

4. Adaptability
A well-designed chatbot can handle diverse user queries, clarify requirements, and guide users through the recommendation process.

5. Feedback loop
Interactive interfaces make it easier to collect user feedback and improve the system over time.

Gradio for chatbot interfaces
Gradio is a Python library for building web-based user interfaces for machine learning models and AI systems. It's particularly well-suited for chatbots because it provides:

Chat components: Pre-built UI elements for displaying conversations.

Quick deployment: Converts Python functions into web interfaces with minimal code.

Customization: Style and layout options to create professional interfaces.

State management: Track conversation history and user context across multiple turns.

Streaming support: Display agent outputs as they're generated (important for LLMs)

Gradio is widely used in the AI community for demos, prototypes, and production applications. It's the technology behind many Hugging Face Spaces demos.

Key chatbot components in Gradio
Chatbot widget
The core component that displays the conversation history. It shows messages from both the user and the assistant in a scrollable interface.

Textbox input
Where users type their messages. Can be configured with placeholders, submit buttons, and keyboard shortcuts.

State management
Gradio's State component maintains conversation history and user context across multiple interactions.

Blocks layout
Gradio Blocks provide flexible layouts where you can arrange components, add custom CSS, and create multi-section interfaces.

Designing the chatbot UI
Your chatbot interface will include:

1. Main chat area
A prominent chat window where users interact with the recommendation system.

2. User input field
A text box where users type their preferences, dietary restrictions, and requests.

3. Clear/reset button
Allows users to start a new conversation and clear the history.

Optional features
Display the user profile as it's generated

Show recommendation progress (e.g., "Analyzing food trends...")

Format recommendations with headings, bullet points, and highlighting

Add sample prompts to help users get started

Building an adaptive chatbot
Your chatbot needs to handle two types of user requests:

1. Restaurant recommendations
User asks for restaurant suggestions based on their preferences.

Example: "I'm looking for vegetarian restaurants with good ambiance for a date night."

System behavior: Generate user profile, retrieve restaurants, analyze options, and return recommendations.

2. Recipe recommendations
User asks for recipe ideas they can cook at home.

Example: "I want to try cooking Thai food at home. Any recipe suggestions?"

System behavior: Generate user profile, retrieve recipes, analyze options, and return recommendations.

The chatbot should:

Classify the request: Determine if the user wants restaurants, recipes, or both

Extract preferences: Identify cuisines, dietary restrictions, occasion, etc.

Invoke the appropriate workflow: Run the multi-agent system with the extracted information

Format the output: Present recommendations in a clear, engaging format

Handle follow-ups: Allow users to ask clarifying questions or request alternatives

Natural language understanding
Unlike the previous labs where you passed structured JSON to the agents, the chatbot must interpret unstructured natural language inputs.

Techniques for understanding user intent
Pattern matching: Use regular expressions or keywords to identify requests

plaintext

"restaurant" → Restaurant recommendation mode
"recipe" OR "cook" → Recipe recommendation mode
LLM-based classification: Use an LLM to classify user intent

plaintext

System: Analyze this user message and classify it as:
- "restaurant_request"
- "recipe_request"
- "both"
- "clarification"

User message: "I want to try new vegan places"
Few-shot prompting: Provide examples to guide classification

ruby

Example 1: "Suggest some Italian restaurants" → restaurant_request
Example 2: "How do I make pad thai?" → recipe_request
Example 3: "I'm vegetarian and love spicy food" → both

User message: [actual input]
Extracting user preferences
Convert conversational input into structured preferences that the multi-agent system can use.

User input: "I'm vegetarian, love spicy food, and want something casual and affordable."

Extracted structure:

json

{
  "dietary_restrictions": ["vegetarian"],
  "flavor_preferences": ["spicy"],
  "dining_occasion": "casual",
  "price_range": "$"
}
Use an LLM to perform this extraction:

plaintext

System: Extract user preferences from this message.
Return JSON with keys: dietary_restrictions, flavor_preferences,
dining_occasion, price_range, favorite_cuisines.

User message: [actual input]
Conversation flow
A typical conversation flow might look like:

Turn 1 - User: "I'm looking for dinner ideas" Turn 1 - Bot: "I'd be happy to help! Are you looking for restaurant recommendations or recipes you can cook at home?"

Turn 2 - User: "Restaurants please" Turn 2 - Bot: "Great! Tell me about your preferences—what cuisines do you enjoy? Any dietary restrictions?"

Turn 3 - User: "I love Thai and Indian food. I'm vegetarian." Turn 3 - Bot: [Runs multi-agent system] "Here are my top restaurant recommendations for you: ..."

Turn 4 - User: "The first one sounds great! Any recipe alternatives if I want to cook instead?" Turn 4 - Bot: [Runs multi-agent system for recipes] "Here are some vegetarian Thai and Indian recipes: ..."

The chatbot should:

Ask clarifying questions when needed

Remember context from previous turns

Provide recommendations when sufficient information is available

Offer to refine or adjust recommendations

Database integration features
Your chatbot interface will also include features for editing the vector database:

Add new restaurants
Users can add restaurants they've discovered to the database.

Interface: Form with fields for name, cuisine, price range, description, location, etc.

Add new recipes
Users can contribute their favorite recipes.

Interface: Form with fields for name, ingredients, instructions, cuisine, difficulty, etc.

Update existing items
Edit or correct information for restaurants and recipes already in the database.

Delete items
Remove outdated or incorrect entries.

These features transform the chatbot from a read-only recommendation tool into an interactive platform where users can contribute to the knowledge base.

Implementation approach
You will implement the chatbot in phases:

Phase 1: Basic chat interface
Create a simple chatbot that echoes user messages.

Phase 2: Intent classification
Add logic to classify user requests as restaurant or recipe recommendations.

Phase 3: Multi-agent integration
Connect the chatbot to the multi-agent workflow built by you.

Phase 4: Output formatting
Format agent outputs into readable, engaging messages.

Phase 5: Database integration
Add forms and functions for editing the database.

Phase 6: Polish and testing
Refine the UI, add styling, and test with various user inputs.

What you will do in the lab
In the upcoming lab, you will:

Install Gradio and understand its core components

Build a basic chatbot with conversation history

Implement intent classification to determine user requests

Extract user preferences from natural language input

Integrate the multi-agent workflow you built earlier

Format recommendations for display in the chat interface

Add database management features for adding, updating, and deleting items

Test the chatbot with diverse user queries

Deploy locally and explore deployment options

Key considerations
As you build your chatbot interface, keep these principles in mind:

User-friendly language: Write conversational, helpful messages.

Error handling: Gracefully handle cases where the system can't understand the user.

Performance: Show loading indicators during long operations.

Privacy: Don't store sensitive user data.

Scalability: Design the interface to handle multiple concurrent users.

Accessibility: Ensure the interface is usable for people with different abilities.

Summary
In this reading, you learned that:

Chatbot interfaces make AI systems accessible to non-technical users through natural conversation.

Gradio is a Python library for building web-based interfaces with pre-built chat components, quick deployment, and state management.

Key Gradio components include the Chatbot widget (displays conversation), Textbox input (user messages), State (maintains context), and Blocks layout (flexible UI design).

The chatbot UI should include a main chat area, user input field, clear/reset button, and optional features like progress indicators and formatted outputs.

Adaptive chatbots handle two types of requests: restaurant recommendations and recipe recommendations.

Natural language understanding involves classifying user intent (pattern matching, LLM-based classification) and extracting preferences (converting unstructured input to structured data).

A typical conversation flow includes clarifying questions, context retention, and offering to refine recommendations.

Database integration features allow users to add, update, and delete restaurants and recipes.

Implementation proceeds in phases: basic interface, intent classification, multi-agent integration, output formatting, database features, and polish.

You are now ready to begin the lab, where you will build an interactive chatbot interface using Gradio that makes your multi-agent recommendation system accessible to anyone.